hello Matt fans welcome to the sixth
question from Tom rocks Matt's and I
love mathematics sent in and voted for
by you thank you as always for voting
and the winning question this week is
how does modular arithmetic work to
start with let's think about an example
that hopefully all of you will be
familiar with and that's going to be the
12-hour clock so apologies for the the
circle but it was my best attempt and I
have heard that if you can draw a circle
it's a sign of madness so you know I'm
quite glad that I can't really draw a
circle this is our 12-hour clock and
it's currently nine o'clock so our hand
is pointing to nine now if we let six
hours of time pass
what will the time be if you look at the
clock it's it's not too tricky you know
you can probably all do it your head
nine o'clock six hours of time passes
one two three four five six it goes to
three o'clock but none plus six does not
equal 3 and that's the trick here that's
where this sort of underlying modular
arithmetic that's hidden in the 12-hour
clock sort of comes out of the woodwork
because what we're doing with a clock is
doing arithmetic modulo 12 so that
simply means that when you get to 12 you
then start to get the numbers sort of
wrap around and it looks a bit easier
when you draw it out as a circle of
numbers like this like a clock because
you just sort of go 9 10 11 12 and then
you start to get 1 2 3 and you keep
going round so if it was 9 o'clock and
then 12 hours pass the Hammond will go
all the way around the circle back to 9
so it's still 9 o'clock but 9 plus 12
again it doesn't equal 9 in normal
arithmetic and that's sort of what's
going on with modular arithmetic you you
have a set number and once you get to
that number in this case 12 you just
start again
you just ignore the fact that 12 has
already passed you're only interested in
the bit beyond 12 or beyond multiples of
so let's think about the clock
mathematically so sort of from the
modular arithmetic point of view so nine
o'clock plus six hours we all know is
three o'clock but 9 plus 6 gives you 15
so why is 15 equal to 3 o'clock well
it's to do with the fact that the clock
is modular 12 because you start at 9:00
you then add your 6 you get 15 but
importantly 15 contains one group of 12
and so it doesn't matter that that's
there we sort of ignore that in some
sense it's not relevant so that first
group of 12 which is like those counting
up the first three hours to 12 we just
ignore that and we only care about the
remainder so the bit beyond 12 so in the
case of nine plus six you sort of go to
12 and then there's another three from
12 to 15 and that's why nine o'clock
plus six hours goes to three o'clock
anyway it's exactly the same with any
other number with any other form of
modular arithmetic so say we want to
work out nine plus twenty-five mod
twelve all we're going to do here is add
nine and 25 and then think about what's
the remainder left once you take out
your groups of twelve so you can also
think of it in terms of time so again
it's nine o'clock and then twenty-five
hours pass we sort of know that there
are 24 hours in a day but that's just to
lots of 12 so it's two whole sort of
rotations of the clock by the hour hand
and you do the two whole rotations for
your first 24 that you're adding on and
then you've just got one more so 9 plus
25 in terms of time will just take you
to ten o'clock and it's the same with
the maths because 9 plus 25 it's just 10
more to 12 for exactly that reason that
we just sort of went through with the
clock the first two groups of 12 they
don't matter so what you're sort of
doing is
9 and 25 in the normal way to get say 34
and then you're thinking to yourself
okay how many twelves go into 34 so 34
divided by 12
well there's two and then there's
remained at its head because two lots of
12 gives you the 24 and then there's
another 10 so it's 2 and remained a 10
but this - it doesn't matter in modular
arithmetic because you have to lots of
12 and we don't really care about them
we like ignore them and so here this is
2 lots of 12 it doesn't matter it's just
the remainder being 10 that's the key in
terms of modular arithmetic that's the
only bit that we care about and so
that's why the answer is just 10 mod 12
all the examples I've done so far of
course have been mod 12 and that's
because we were thinking about things in
terms of the 12-hour clock which is mod
12 but of course you can use any number
so let's take 34 which is our 9 plus 25
let's think about what 34 is in say mod
5 okay so we proceed in the same way so
that before we were seeing how many
twelves go into 34 you just do exactly
the same thing so you have 34 and then
you think right how many Lots of 5 go
into that number well 6 fives would give
you 30 and then there's four left so the
answer is going to be four it's sort of
you're just thinking about it like how
many lots of your number your five your
modular number go into the number you
want to work habit and then what's that
remainder so in this case it's just four
and it's really quite as simple as that
it sort of sounds tricky and it looks
tricky I think modular arithmetic
because it's a little bit different but
all you're really doing is just you take
your number that you want to write in a
particular modular form and you just say
how many times does the modular number
divide the number I'm interested in how
many times does 5 go into 34 well it'll
go in 6 times to get 30 and there's four
left
for the answer is four and it works the
same even with negative numbers so let's
look at minus 8 what is minus 8 mod 5
there are a couple of ways you can
approach sort of trying to work this out
if you don't see it straight away so you
can think like well positive 8
for example 1 lots of 5 goes into 8 and
there's a remainder of 3 so because
we're here thinking minus 8 then this
would also be the same as minus 3 and
this is a correct statement this is fine
this is completely true mathematically
but what we try to do in modular
arithmetic is to write our answers in
terms of the positive integers up to
your modular number so in the case of
mod 5 you want your answer to be either
0 1 2 3 or 4 like your clock you're
counting 1 2 3 4 5 6 all the way around
to 12 and then you start again you're
doing the same here when you're going
from north to 4 and then back to not so
rather than writing this is minus 3
which of course is inside that naught 2
for interval we want our answer to be
what you can do is just add 5 until you
get into that interval so minus 3 plus 5
gives you 2 and that does indeed lie
between the interval of North to 5 that
we want so here the answer is also just
2 and it looks a bit neater and I also
gave another little trick there in
working that out when you're working
your modular arithmetic and that's to
add the modular number over and over
again to your number or similarly you
can subtract it so with a number like
minus 8 you can just add 5 because 5
remember is 0 mod high so it's like if
you've got the number 3 and then you add
0 you're still at 3 well adding 5 in mod
5 is the same as adding
it doesn't change your answer and that's
pretty much all there is to it it's it's
not really any harder than normal or is
meticulous cool and University it's just
you have to just think a little bit more
but you're not really doing anything
different the operations are addition
subtraction multiplication division they
all work exactly the same way so you do
the normal operation to get your answer
once you have that answer you then just
convert it into the correct form by
dividing by your modular number and
working out the remainder it's it's
really as simple as that so let's do one
final example say seven times nine and
we want to work out what is seven times
nine modular 21 so to start with you
just do seven times nine in the normal
way so seven nine 63 so seven times nine
equals 63 and we want to know what this
is modular 21 well you just get your
answer and then you say right how many
20 ones go into 63 well 63 is exactly
three lots of 21 so 63 divided by 21
exactly three with zero remainder and
this bit here is what's key a fact that
is zero remainder means that the answer
here is simply 0 mod 21 so have a go
yourselves just take a simple set of
some simple set of multiplications and
just try and convert them into modular
arithmetic just pick a number and say
write I'm going to work out these ten
zones in say modular 63 and the more
practice you do the more it will become
second nature and the more you'll
realize that moderate fatigue is not
really that much harder than normal
arithmetic so thank you every morning
for watching I hope I'm answered the
question if you like what I'm doing
please do subscribe that way you'll be
the first to hear when a new video
becomes available and also be sure to
check out all my material on my
website Tom rocks mass comm and also you
can follow me on Facebook Twitter
Instagram at Tom rocked maths and I will
see you next time with another answer to
a question that you guys have voted for